---
title: "20 years of coding (Part 1)"
slug: "20-years-of-coding-part-1"
created: "2023-03-24T19:05:08.000Z"
tags:
  - C
  - BASIC
  - ActionScript
  - Flash
  - programming
---

Some 20 years ago, I wrote my first line of C code. Here is my journey and how
it made me develop as a software engineer.

### Constrains are a good thing

We live in a time where information is at our fingertips. We carry a
mini-computer in our pockets which is much more powerful than ever. Yet, we are
bombarded with so many distractions that we barely take advantage of this
miraculous progress.

![My first computer](/assets/keyboard-game.webp)

When I was about 12 years old, my mother bought us a 'computer' game similar to
the one in the picture above, except it was much worse. The keys were made of
this bad plastic, and they would get stuck all the time. If I wanted to do
something remotely productive, I had to have a screwdriver next to me to unblock
them. We used it as a typical game console for a few years, but soon after I
started high school and was introduced to programming, I went back to it and had
a eureka moment. The main disk that came with the game had a BASIC interpreter
on it! Holy shit!

I was already a bit into my second semester, and my physics teacher, "domnul
Ancuța," was already my mentor and a father figure (that's what happens when you
don't have one around; you take what you can elsewhere). We had the most
ridiculous conversation ever. I was trying to describe my game and the BASIC
interpreter, and he was convinced that I actually had a Commodore 64 machine. We
went back and forth for quite a bit until I gave up and said something like,
"Okay, let's say I have a Commodore. Do you have some books to help me learn
BASIC?" He definitely had! He gave me three books, one with QBasic and two more
with some other dialects.

They were very old books from the communist times, with yellow (more like brown)
pages and a "weird" language. But I was happy to have some free resources to
learn from. I went home and started to try all kinds of commands to see what
works and what doesn't. I had one huge limitation, though (apart from the shitty
keyboard): there was no file system, so I couldn't save my work. Instead, I had
to write it down in a notebook and, in the next session, I had to type it all
from scratch. My brother Remus told me that I was nuts, I prefer to call it
passion.

Computer Science 101 usually starts with very basic concepts (no pun intended),
such as variables, constants, and flow control instructions. They exist in most
programming languages, so I could apply them both in BASIC at home and in C at
school. The homework we were getting was pretty simple as well: say if a number
is a palindrome, calculate the sum of a number's digits, calculate the nth
Fibonacci number, etc. I would write the solution in pseudocode and then
translate it to BASIC to verify it on my little machine. Once everything worked,
I would translate it by hand into C, on paper. I made sure that I always went to
the lab early so I could get the chance to type it in and fix any syntax errors
that I had made. I was constrained, but it made me grow up in a "bilingual
house".

### Add (good) comments to your code

Just after I turned 17, we finally could afford to have our own PC that I would
share with my brother Remus. Like any youngsters that had just gotten their
hands on a powerful machine (it was a Pentium 4, quite performant for its time),
we were playing games like crazy, and apart from my homework, I wasn't doing
much programming on it. Oh well, just a few months later, the graphics card went
bananas. My immediate thought was that God had punished me for playing too many
games and not doing something more productive with the PC. I mean, it was the
graphics card that failed, something that I considered a clear sign of
punishment.

After we finally got the money to buy a new graphics card, I went back to domnul
Ancuța and asked for a copy of Macromedia Flash. He gave me Macromedia Flash 6
on a CD with a bunch of other things. Here I was with a new toy. I went to the
library and got a book about ActionScript 2.0 and started devouring it. I loved
how simple it was to make animations and control them from code. I was easily
getting better at using the Help documentation instead of relying on the book.
The first programs that I created were pretty basic. It was all about learning
the language.

The summer break came around, and I finally decided to write something a bit
more complex. I ended up choosing to write a simple tic-tac-toe game with both
single player and two players. For the single player, I didn't go for random
moves but instead coded the player logic as well as I could. This resulted in
the game having around 700 lines of code, without a single comment, because why
not? Of course, that didn't go so well! After a few months, I returned to the
game to make some improvements, but I couldn't understand much of it. I have a
pretty bad memory, and sufficient time had passed to erase everything from my
head. I tried to make sense of it, but I just realized that it was much easier
to write it from scratch, this time with code comments. They were pretty simple
(at times silly) comments, but they were enough to guide me around. I put them
to the test when I returned for a 3rd version of the game.

### Understand your limitations and find ways to overcome them

Talking about bad memory, one of my favorite quotes is "Use your brain like a
CPU, not like a hard drive." Even if I wanted to use it as a storage device, I
wouldn't be very successful. I struggled quite a bit in school to memorize
poetry or almost any kind of information that I just had to take in. Maybe
that's why I was only good at maths, physics, chemistry, and computer science.

The biggest influence that my brother Remus had on me (apart from his amazing
taste in music) is that he got me into Kung Fu. We've practiced a combination of
[Choy Lee Fut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choy_Li_Fut), [Tai
Chi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tai_chi), street fighting, and full contact
fighting. We got to experience both the traditional side of it (different
positions and forms), and the practical side of it, which included fighting each
other in the ring. The combination of those styles has definitely helped me to
develop a sense of self-awareness that I wasn't having before. It helped me spot
my strengths and weaknesses both physically and mentally.

Back in 2009, I joined Continental for a position that nowadays you'd call a QA
Automation Engineer. I was part of their "Interior Body and Security"
department, and my task was to automate their end-to-end tests using an XML file
containing the car configuration. I would use XSLT to generate thousands of
test-cases based on that input configuration and then feed those files into the
testing system.

I had a huge problem, though. I would come back on Monday to work and wonder
what I was up to the Friday before. Part of it was my poor skills at naming
things, part of it was the lack of good comments, and part of it was my poor
memory. After a couple of failed Mondays where I would need 30 to 60 minutes to
remember everything that I had in mind the week before, I started keeping a
journal. On Fridays, I would write down a little summary of what I'd been doing
and any improvements that I wanted to bring to the templates, and then on the
next Monday, I would just read it and resume from where I left. It was almost
like suspending a VM in VirtualBox and then resuming it back the week after. It
worked very well and helped me get those 30-60 minutes back.

_This marks the end of the first part of this series. In the [second
part](/blog/20-years-of-coding-part-2), I have covered my experience entering
the workforce as a professional programmer._

/Elvis
