---
title: "A tale of technical debt"
slug: "a-tale-of-technical-debt"
created: "2023-12-14T15:51:00.000Z"
tags:
  - tech-debt
---

The morning sun is slowly lighting up the valley while you are finishing the
last section of what has become the _**boilerplate**_ structure of your hangar.
You've built something similar hundreds of times, maybe not at this scale, and
definitely not in such a lovely area. The stream of water nearby will be just
perfect for producing the electricity you need, but for now, you'll only use a
few oil-based lamps for illumination and resort on mechanical devices for the
rest of the work. All the electrical wiring is done, and now you have to figure
out how big of a generator needs to be built. Your past experiences taught you
not to do any _**premature work**_; otherwise, you'll just end up with some
suboptimal solution that won't fit the _**requirements**_. I mean, do remember
how crazy the last project was when you ended up with two generators and
_**spaghetti**_ cables all over the place? You know better now.

A few hours fly by, and now the sun is almost above your head. You have a very
solid plan about the hangar, but you cannot stop wondering about your
_**infrastructure**_. The rain from last week proved how muddy the access road
can get, despite the amount of rocks you have already applied. You will
definitely need some proper pavement or even asphalt, but you are by no means an
infrastructure expert, so you'll have to rely on some other engineer to do the
work. Luckily, your friend Dave has the right skills and could help you with it;
however, he can only start the work next month. So for now, more rocks are your only
solution. Transporting them from the river bank takes some time and will for
sure have an impact on your _**time frame**_. Let's just hope it won't add too
much of a delay. The sooner the infrastructure will be in place, the better your
_**development experience**_ will get.

With a full stomach (maybe you ate too much), you are now ready to
compartmentalize the hangar into a few sections. One area will be dedicated to
the _**storage**_ of the raw materials, one area will be designated for the
workbench where you will be spending most of your time, and finally, one area
will be dedicated to _**temporarily keeping the artifacts**_ you have created
before _**shipping**_ them to the client.

